```metadata
title: Book of Artifacts for 5e
description: ''
tags:
  - ''
systems:
  - 5e
renderer: legacy
theme: 5ePHB

```


AL-QADIM™ Campaign (ahl kah-DEEM)
Take a magic carpet ride to adventure! Behold the legendary might of Zakhara, the Land of Fate. In this realm of burning
sands and burning passions, threads of Arabian legend are richly interwoven with the fantasy of the AD&D® game. Visit
spired cities, lush oases, and mysterious isles set in glittering seas. Meet sultans and sheikhs. See genies and giants. Discover a
trove of new magical treasures! Whether your character sets sail from the compatible FORGOTTEN REALMS setting or
explores Zakhara as a native, the exotic AL-QADIM campaign will enchant role-players for a thousand and one adventures.
GREYHAWK® Campaign
Bigby, Tenser, Mordenkainen, Leomund .. . If you've perused the spells and magical items for the AD&D game, you've
discovered their famous names. These and other personalities hail from the GREYHAWK campaign setting, the oldest world
created for the AD&D game line. Steeped in tradition, the GREYHAWK campaign abounds with castles and valiant knights.
It is also a realm of free-wheeling adventure and mercenaries for hire. In the wake of a recent war, the nations live with an
uneasy truce. Now heroes face new challenges in the endless struggle for the cause of good, from eluding the nefarious spies
of the Scarlet Brotherhood to evading the ghoulish army of Ivid the Undying.
DRAGONLANCE® Campaign
Enter the world of Ansalon, a land of romance and high adventure. Discover tinker gnomes, gully dwarves, nefarious
villains, noble heroes . . . and dark, deadly dragons. All things draconian play a starring role in this world—from the
half-man, half-dragon thugs who patrol the streets, to the evil red dragons who fill the skies, to the beautiful creatures of
gold and silver who do battle on the side of good. This is a world struggling to regain its lost honor and glory—a land where
unlikely adventurers can become legendary heroes.
DARK SUN® Campaign ^^ ^
The DARK SUN world is TSR's most savage game setting—a desert realm scorched by a relentless sun, blasted by the
destructive magic of generations of evil wizards. It is a land of evil sorcerer-kings and powerful psionicists (characters with
astounding paranormal powers). In this wild and brutal landscape, a single adventurer can alter the course of unfolding
history.
RAVENLOFT® Campaign
Whether you journey to Ravenloft for an occasional evening of terror or an extended nightmare, the experience will haunt
you forever. The RAVENLOFT campaign is a horrific realm of dread and desire, rooted in the Gothic tradition. The misty
fingers of this world can reach into any other campaign setting to draw unsuspecting travelers into its midst. Once it holds
them in its icy embrace, it may never let them go. In a shadowy world filled with vampires, werewolves, and ghosts, only
those who are strong of heart may survive.
FORGOTTEN REALMS® Campaign
Well met. . . and welcome to the most popular, most detailed fantasy campaign world ever created. Here gods walk the
earth and fantastic armies clash. Visitors explore a vast frontier filled with fascinating folk, from bold heroes and whimsical
characters to shadowy villains and clandestine societies. This is the home of Elminster the sage and Drizzt the dark .elf—two
heroes featured in TSR's best-selling FORGOTTEN REALMS novel line. No setting can match the grand scope of the
FORGOTTEN REALMS campaign world.

Incredible Magic for All Campaigns!
Design: David "Zeb" Cook
Additional Artifact Design: Rich Baker, Wolfgang Baur, Steve and Glenda Burns,
Bill Connors, Dale "Slade" Henson, Colm McComb, Thomas M. Reid, and
David Wise
Supervision and Development: David "Zeb" Cook
Editing: Thomas M Reid
Additional Editing and Proofreading: David Wise
Cover Art: Fred Fields
Art Coordination: Peggy Cooper
Interior Art and Icons: Daniel Frazier
Graphic Coordination: Sarah Feggestad
Typesetting: Gaye O'Keefe
TSR, Inc
FOB 756
Lake Geneva
WI53147 US A
TSR Ltd
120 Church End, Cherry Hinton
Cambridge CB1 3LB
United Kingdom
2
Random House and its affiliate companies have worldwide distribution rights in the book trade for English language products of TSR, Inc
Distributed to the book and hobby trade in the United Kingdom by TSR Ltd
Distributed to the toy and hobby trade by regional distributors
ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS AD&D, DARK SUN DRAGONLANCE, FORGOTTEN REALMS, GREYHAWK, RAVENLOFT, GAMMA WORLD, and
SPET T JAMMER are registered trademarks owned by TSR Inc
AL-QADIM DUNGEON MASTER, DM, BATTLESYSTEM, MONSTROUS COMPENDIUM, and the TSR logo are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc
All TSR characters, character names, and the distinctive likenesses thereof are trademarks owned by TSR, Inc
This material is protected under the copyright laws of the United States of America Anv reproduction or other unauthorized use of the material or artwork contained
herein is prohibited without the express written consent of TSR, Inc
Printed in U S A
Copyright ©1993 TSR, Inc All Rights Reserved
1-56076-672-7
Introduction ..........................................................3
Acorn of Wo Mai.................................................ll
All-Knowing Eye of Yasmin Sira ......................12
Apparatus...............................................................l3
Artifurnace...........................................................l6
Axe of the Dwarvish Lords...............................17
Axe of the Emperors ..........................................19
BabaYaga's Hut..................................................21
Blackjammer's Cutlass ......................................24
Book with No End..............................................25
Codex of the Infinite Planes..............................27
Coin of Jisan the Bountiful................................28
Crystal of the Ebon Flame.................................29
Cup of Al'Akbar.................................................30
Talisman of Al'Akbar.........................................30
Death Rock ..........................................................32
Hammer of Gesen ..............................................33
HandofVecna.....................................................35
Eye of Vecna........................................................35
Herald of Mei Lung ...........................................37
Heward's Mystical Organ.................................39
Horn of Change..................................................42
Invulnerable Coat and Arnd ............................43
Iron Bow of Gesen..............................................44
Iron Flask of Tuerny the Merciless...................45
Ivory Chain of Pao .............................................46
Jacinth of Inestimable Beauty...........................46
Johydee'sMask...................................................49
Kuroth's Quill .....................................................50
MaceofCuthbert.................................................52
Machine of Lum the Mad..................................53
Mighty Servant of Leuk-o .................................58
Monocle of Bagthalos ........................................61
Obsidian Man.....................................................63
Orbs of Dragonkind...........................................65
Psychometron of Nerad ....................................77
Queen Ehlissa's Marvelous Nightingale.........78
Recorder of Ye'Cind ...........................................79
Regalia of Good ..................................................80
Regalia of Neutrality..........................................80
Regalia of Evil .....................................................80
Ring of Gaxx........................................................90
Rod of Seven Parts .............................................91
Rod of Teeth ........................................................93
Scepter of the Sorcerer-Kings............................95
Seal of Jafar al-Samal .........................................97
Silencer of Bodach..............................................98
Sword of Kas.....................................................100
Teeth of Dahlvar-Nar.......................................l01
Throne of the Gods ..........................................103
Triad of Betryal .................................................105
Creating Magical Items ...................................107
Recharging Magical Items...............................l30
Appendix A: Common Rechargeable
Magical Items.................................................137
Appendix B: Random Power Tables..............l38
Appendix C: Song List for Heward's
Mystical Organ..............................................159

\page
<div class='wide'>### Introduction</div>

Welcome to the big Book of Artifacts! Within these
pages is one of the most amazing, diverse, and
colorful collections of arcane magic ever assembled
for use in AD&D® campaigns. Before getting
started, though, it's time to clear up a few
misconceptions:

"Artifacts are too powerful for a campaign."
Not true! Artifact does not mean immensely powerful.
The Herald ofMei Lung is useful, but it can't
blast anyone to ashes the way the Axe of the
Emperors might. It's not the power, but the history
and role-playing opportunities that really
make the difference.

"All artifacts have horrible curses that keep
them from being useful." All artifacts have side
effects that reflect their nature, but not all side
effects are curses. The fiend trapped in the Acorn of
Wo Mai is definitely evil, and freeing him would
be a bad thing. The truthfulness imposed by the
Crown of Law isn't evil, although it may create difficulties
for the player character. These side effects
create opportunities for role-playing as characters
are faced with the choices, changes, and dilemmas
that great power brings. With prudence and good
judgement, most artifacts can be used safely by
PCs, but only by testing their mettle.

"Artifacts are just collections of random powers."
It used to be that artifacts had very little definition—a
bit of history, one or two powers, and a
lot of fill-in-the-blanks that relied on random
tables. In the Book of Artifacts, there are all types.
Some still let the DM choose powers while others
are completely defined. The majority of artifacts
here have their major powers defined while the
lesser powers are left for the DM to pick.

"Artifacts are all created by gods that
shouldn't be involved in the campaign." No,
many are the work of heroes from ages long past
and a good number have their origins lost in
time. The Coin ofjisan the Bountiful is tied to that
goddess and may not be suitable for every campaign,
but the same cannot be said of the Machine
ofLum the Mad. There are more than enough artifacts
available that are free of the troublesome
interference of gods.

"Artifacts are found only in the GREYHAWK®
campaign." The first artifacts did appear in the
GREYHAWK setting, and most of those are found
in here, but the GREYHAWK world has no lock
on artifacts. All the old favorites and many new
ones appear in this book, suitable for any campaign.
There are also artifacts designed for the
FORGOTTEN REALMS®, DRAGONLANCE®,
DARK SUN®, SPELLJAMMER®, RAVENLOFT®,
and AL-QADIM"' settings.

"If the characters stumble across an artifact,
it could ruin the campaign." Purely and simply,
nobody ever "stumbles upon" an artifact. Artifacts
are special, and no one just finds them
lying around. There are no treasure tables for
artifacts; they do not appear in random treasure
piles. In fact, the only time characters can find an
artifact is when the DM wants them to. It's
assumed that the characters won't be given an
artifact unless the DM is ready to deal with it.

"A character with an artifact will ruin the
adventure." The artifact is the adventure, and is
there because the adventure needs it. Artifacts
are about stories, and characters find them
because there is a special need. Throughout the
Book of Artifacts, there are adventure suggestions
built around the artifacts.

"Artifacts are nothing but a headache." Of
course they are if the DM and players don't use
them well. Give a character Baba Yaga's Hut without
a little planning and thought, and disaster will
certainly follow. With a little preparation, however,
artifacts make for memorable adventures.
With all these misconceptions out of the way,
it's clear that artifacts can be used in ways that
won't unbalance the campaign, destroy player
characters, muck up the world, or even ruin an
adventure.
Now, doesn't that feel better?


\page
<div class='wide'>### Introduction</div>

## What's In Here?

The Book of Artifacts is a supplement for the
core rules of the AD&D® 2nd Edition game. In
other words, everything in this book is optional.
This is not something every DM must have or a
book every player should read. DM's who want
to use the material here can, others don't have
to. The Book of Artifacts is not a vital piece for
every campaign.

As one might expect, the Book of Artifacts
includes descriptions of artifacts for use in the
game. These descriptions fill the better part of
the book. Each description includes a history
and advice for creating adventures that revolve
around the artifact.

To aid the DM in using artifacts, there is also a
chapter of general information about artifacts. In
it the DM can find advice on creating new artifacts,
building adventures around artifacts, getting
artifacts out of a campaign, and how to
repair a damaged campaign if an artifact gets
out of hand.

Although not directly related to artifacts, two
chapters dealing with the creation and recharging
of magical items have also been included.
These give detailed rules and guidelines to help
the DM when player characters decide to make
their own magical items. Now, when the PC
mage wants to recharge a wand of frost or make a
potion of spider climbing, the DM will be ready.

After all this comes a host of appendices.
These cover tables for artifact powers, diagrams
of the control panels for the Machine of Lum the
Mad and the stops of Heward's Mystical Organ,
listings of artifacts suitable to particular AD&D
worlds, and more. The DM can use these to create
and integrate his own artifacts into the campaign.

The best way to approach this material is to
skip around. DM's are encouraged to read
through the chapter on artifacts first. The artifact
descriptions can be read in any order desired or
not read at all. The information on magical items
can be read when needed; none of the rules there
is needed to use any artifact in a campaign.

```
```

## What is an Artifact?

Since this book is about artifacts, it helps to
have a clear idea of just what an artifact is and
isn't. It's not what a lot of people expect.
One occasional point of confusion is that there
are two different names for the same thing—
artifact and relic. Artifacts are powerful magical
items that have wizard, priest, or other powers
and are made by gods, lichs, wizards, and other
spellcasters. Relics are powerful magical items
that have wizard, priest, or other powers, are
made by gods and priests, and have some holy
importance to a particular temple. Otherwise,
the two types are identical. Throughout this
book, the term "artifact" refers to both artifacts
and relics. "Relic" refers only to that group of
artifacts that have holy significance.
A common assumption is that an artifact is
any ultra-powerful magical device. This is not
true. A staff of the magi is considered by many to
be an ultra-powerful device, but it is not an artifact.
Indeed, many artifacts have fewer powers
than this staff. While most artifacts are potent
(because the DM wants them to be memorable),
sheer power is not a defining quality. An artifact
must have three properties: it must be unique, it
must have a history, and it must be important to
the adventure.
___
**Unique**. Artifacts are one-of-a-kind items, and
that's part of what makes them valuable. There's
only one Talisman of Al-Akbar. If there were
more, they wouldn't be as special. In most campaigns,
this means there's only one in the entire
world. In those campaigns that cross to different
worlds (as a SPELLJAMMER® game would), it
means there's only one in all the worlds and
planes. This also means that characters who are
brought from one DM's campaign to another
cannot bring artifacts with them. The DM gets to
keep those toys.
___
**History**. One of the most important features of
every artifact is that it has baggage. Someone or
something made it, used it, and eventually man4
aged to lose it. The history should explain or at
least hint at the reason the artifact exists and
what it was originally used for. The tale may
also tell what has happened to the artifact since
it was made, particularly the great or wondrous
fates of successive owners. Histories are important.
They provide something for the player
characters to research and a means for the DM to
give clues about the item's vast powers. A colorful
if not wholly accurate description of the terrible
fate that met the last owner of the Crystal of
the Ebon Flame is certain to make the player characters
cautious, should they ever find the same
device.
___
Story. This is the most curious qualifier for an
artifact since it doesn't really affect the powers
of the item or any other aspect of the game rules.
It does affect how the DM uses an artifact and
the information players might gain.

Purely and simply, artifacts exist to tell stories.
Characters don't just "find" an artifact. They
discover it because the DM put it there as part of
a specific adventure. The minute an artifact
turns up, smart players will know the DM has a
special adventure in mind for their characters.

As befits the unique nature of artifacts, adventures
built around them can't be ordinary ones.
The DM should make every effort to create a
memorable challenge for the players. With their
histories, artifacts have the tools to make good
stories, but it is up the DM to finish the job.
So there it is. Artifacts are unique and colorful
magical items that provide adventure tools for
the DM. They don't have to be powerful items,
although, because of their histories, most are.
One last point—artifacts are optional! No DM
must include artifacts in a campaign. Even if
they are used, no DM has to use every artifact
listed in this book. DMs can always pick and
choose those liked best and declare that the rest
do not exist in the campaign.
More importantly, no player has the right to
tell any DM that an artifact must exist in the
5 campaign. In a normal group, with only one
DM, this is seldom a problem. It is important to
remember this, however, for those groups where
several DMs may be running the same player
characters at different times. If Martha is DMing
and introduces the Sword of Kas for an adventure,
players should not insist that John let them
use the Sword of Kas when he is DMing the same
characters in a later adventure. If it is necessary,
remember that artifacts always have an amazing
ability to vanish unexpectedly, only to reappear
innocently at some later date.
The artifacts described in this book are not the
only artifacts that can be used in a campaign.
Artifacts, with their detailed histories and powerful
effects, are personal things, so it makes
sense that the DM should create artifacts unique
to an individual campaign. In fact, that's just
what the DM should do. Every campaign should
have artifacts that are truly unique to it, thereby
ensuring that the DM's world is different from
every other campaign out there.
Great idea, the DM may say, but how do I do
it?
Don't worry. It's really not that hard. By following
a few simple guidelines, DMs discover
that artifacts practically create themselves. This
section provides a step-by-step example of the
whole process.
Artifacts are about wonder—not power like
many players think. Artifacts are the highest of
all magic in a normal campaign, so they have to
be surprising, awe-inspiring, and unpredictable;
in other words, all the things that make the
world wondrous. Artifacts can't be ho-hum
devices bound by the standard rules of magical
devices—the dreary realities of charges, command
words, and the like. Artifacts exist to
break the rules.
By the strict game rules, nobody could build
the Machine of Lum the Mad—but Lum did. By
the game rules, no one would make the Rod of
Seven Parts—but it was made. The pseudo-scientific
Apparatus doesn't conform to the rules
for spells and magical devices—but it doesn't
matter. It's the effect that is important, the feel
of wonder and mystery that is added to the
campaign.
When creating an artifact, consider first the
effect. A good idea is to choose something that is
impossible by normal spells and magical items.
This makes the artifact special and desirable.
The effect doesn't have to be all-powerful, only
impossible by the current rules. Make that the
principal effect of the artifact.
This artifact makes a wizard's spells permanent, so he
never has to memorize spells.
That's pretty powerful and impossible, and
it's a good example for an artifact's effect. So,
where does one go next?
Any wizards or priests worth half their salt
can make a magical item. They get a bunch of
materials, research a few spells, lock themselves
away in a tower or cellar, and poof-bingo-bango!—
there's a magical item. While the materials and
steps needed may be a mystery, the process itself
is not mysterious. Everyone knows spellcasters
make magical items, so no one is surprised
when Jalarko the Magnificent comes out of his
tower waving a long sword +1.
Artifacts, though, are not just things. They
quickly take on a life of their own. It's better to
imagine an artifact as being born rather than
built. Birth implies mystery and strangeness,
wonder beyond a mere manufacturing process.
As much as characters might like to, nobody in
the present history of a campaign "makes" artifacts.
Artifacts always come from times more distant,
a few centuries to a few millennia in the
6
past. Sometimes the maker and the circumstances
of the device's creation are well known;
more often, however, the history of who did
what and what was done is vague and uncertain.
It is said that this artifact, the Crown of Memory,
was a gift to the archmage Forlin from his
grateful former apprentices, now mighty mages
themselves. In his advanced years, their beloved
master's memory was not all it could have been,
and so for his 180th birthday they sought a solution.
Their gift decided, each worked his part in
secrecy, fashioning and adding a little more to
the crown without yet knowing what the others
had done. It is said that one of them even pleaded
to the powers of magic for aid in the task. Perhaps
his cries were heard, for the Crown was the
result.
Simply saying that an artifact is, is not enough.
Artifacts come wrapped in long chains of history
and legend that bind them to specific places
and things. Part of this is in the mystery of their
birth—who first made them, who first used
them, who first died at their hands—but their
legends reach beyond this. Artifacts are like
proverbial bad pennies, resurfacing time and
time again to wreak havoc, inspire tragedy, or
save the day. Each appearance is a mini-epic in
which the artifact plays a central role. No tale is
ever, "Oh by the way, he used this artifact he
found." Instead, the artifact changes the hero (or
heroine); sometimes for the better, oft for the
worse, and then like an actor whose part is finished,
it disappears from the stage. Imagine that
artifacts have wills of their own. They allow
themselves to be discovered and used and they
leave when the time is done.
One practical effect of coming up with a colorful
tale is that it provides the DM with the
ammunition needed for adventures and so forth,
in the form of rumors, legends, and hints for the
campaign. Since learning the powers of any artifact
is supposed to be hard, these tales (already
prepared) may be the best sources of meager
information for the player characters.
When the archmage finally died, dissension rose
among his loyal students. Some wanted to inter
the treasure with their master, while others
decried this ivaste. The argument was settled
when Liras seized the Crown and claimed it as
her own. The wrath of all the others turned upon
her, but, aided by the Crown, Liras slew them
all. Ambition fueled a madness in her and so,
with the Crown's might, she overthrew the
rightful king and proclaimed the Sorcerous
Dynasty. Terrible was her rule, as she crushed
any who opposed her. At last the hero Turoc,
aided by a bound fiend, brought an end to her
reign.
Alas for Turoc, the fiend tricked the warrior
into undoing its bond. Claiming the Crown as
its prize, it slew its former master and fled from
this plane. Perhaps it and the Crown still
remain in the Abyss.
The old maxim "with great power comes
great responsibility" couldn't be more true in the
case of artifacts. Nothing is free or easy about
these devices. There are always costs, drawbacks,
or outright curses tied to their use.
This has two effects, both important for the
campaign. First, an effective curse quickly discourages
any potential abuse of the artifact's
powers. Risking possession or the arrival of a
major fiend each time a power is used generally
promotes cautious behavior on the part of the
player characters. Second, by giving the player
characters an artifact fraught with its own perils
that must be used in the adventure, the DM generates
tension. "Do I dare call upon the powers
of the Scepter of the Sorcerer Kings, or should I
wait and hope to get out of this alive some other
way?" Of course, to be truly effective, the player
characters should have some idea of what the
curse is, preferably by learning the supposed
fates of previous owners.
7
The Crown holds trapped within it Liras's spirit.
Once it longed for power, but centuries in the Abyss
have driven it vengefully mad. Any who wear the
Crown risk activating the mad spirit trapped within.
From the adventure standpoint, a good curse
adds a necessary touch of drama and pathos to
an item's history. It is far more memorable to say
Ethganir Heartbow used the Axe of the Emperors
to save the city, only to have it sap his life away,
than to just say he used it and later got killed.
This balance between weal and woe, need and
risk, is what makes artifacts exciting to use.
Although every artifact is unique, there are
two cursed properties found in many of these
items—artifact possession and artifact transformation.
The first occurs when that item imposes its
will and goals upon the personality of its owner.
This is a subtle and insidious change that often
passes unremarked by others until too late. The
second power actually changes something more
concrete about the character—physical form,
alignment, race, even class may be altered to
something more desirable to the artifact. While
the change is slow, the effect far less subtle than
its cousin.
In addition to the powers possessed individually,
all artifacts share certain features in common.
These properties generally conceal and
protect the artifact, placing them outside the
normal rules for magical items.
• Artifacts are unique. Unless the description
says more than one exists, there can only be one
of each in a campaign world.
• Artifacts radiate only dim power to a detect
magic spell. The spell never reveals the type of
magic involved.
• Artifacts are immune to detect evil, identify,
know alignment, or locate object spells.
• Legend lore and contact other plane spells never
reveal the location of an artifact. These spells can
be used to learn more about an artifact's powers,
but the answers are often highly mysterious.
• Artifacts are immune to physical or magical
harm, except by a few specific means. If placed
in a situation where a magical item would be
utterly destroyed (such as crushed under an
immense slab) the artifact simply disappears.
This immunity extends even to the powers of
the gods.
• The effects of artifacts, particularly the curses,
are permanent unless otherwise noted. Even
wishes or supplications to the gods cannot undo
the harm an artifact has caused.
When an item is capable of artifact possession,
the DM should note the goals and ambitions
outlined in the Curse section of the device's
8
description. This is what a possessed character
will seek to do or become. A wise DM will be
prepared to deal with this possession, should it
occur.
Artifacts do not instantly possess their owners—that
would be no fun. Instead, the degeneration
of a character is a gradual process, as the
character slides further and further out of control.
Not only does this provide the opportunity
to build mystery and horror, but it gives the
player ample warning of the fate that awaits.
Possession checks are made using the same
rules as those for intelligent magical items.
However, one check is made every week in addition
to checks required from potential conflicts
between the character and the artifact. (These
are not based on alignment, but on the goals and
history of the item.) For these checks, treat the
artifact as if it has a personality score of 40 +
1dlO.
Each time the character's personality is overwhelmed,
the artifact is able to assert a little
more control over the character. The DM must
track how many times this occurs, for once domination
has taken place a number of times equal
to the character's Wisdom score, the PC is permanently
and forever possessed. Furthermore,
characters partially overwhelmed (say, a character
with a Wisdom score of 12 who has been
dominated 6 times) have greater difficulty resisting
the artifact or shaking off its effects. Use the
ratio of possessions to total Wisdom as a percentage
guide (50% in the above example).
The ultimate purpose of artifact possession is
to increase role-playing danger and excitement.
There is no set length for the possession process.
Instead, the DM should prolong or shorten it as
best suits the drama of the campaign; too
quickly and the tension of the character's gradual
decay is lost, too slowly and the fear of possession
is lost. It is a balancing act the DM must
master.
A more obvious case of character destruction
is artifact transformation. As with possession, the
artifact's curse will describe just how the character
changes. It is then the DM's task to adjudicate
this subtle shift.
Each week that a character owns an artifact, a
saving throw vs. polymorph (with a -4 penalty)
must be rolled. Do not explain to players the
purpose of this roll. If the saving throw is successful,
nothing happens. If it is failed, then
sometime during that week, a change occurs in
the character and one aspect of the character
adopts the new form. If an artifact is slowly
changing Chekhos the Warrior into an ogre, then
he might wake up one morning to find himself
much bigger. His clothes and armor no longer
fit, and he suffers larger-than-man-sized damage
in combat. The next week, he might not be
as handsome as he once was, as his Charisma
drops to more ogrish levels. In the third week,
Chekhos's wits dull, and so on until the process
is complete.
Artifact transformation is not meant to be beneficial
to the character. This is important. The character
in the process of becoming an ogre could
benefit from ogre strength, but find himself both
clumsy and ugly.
The transformation is not only physical. As
the new form becomes more final, the character's
personality should reflect the change. The
soon-to-be ogre starts to harbor ogrish thoughts
and ogrish habits. When the transformation is
complete, so is the personality change. Those
transformed into monsters are immediately
relinquished to the DM for use as NPCs.
The first part of every artifact description is a
description of the item's appearance, accompanied
by an illustration. In most cases this
description can be read directly to the players
when the artifact is discovered. Of course, all
9
mention of the item's name should be avoided—
that is for the players and their characters to
learn later. Every artifact has a unique set of powers that
can be divided into five categories: constant,
invoked, random, resonating, and curse. The most
important powers are usually defined here.
The background of every artifact is important,
since it explains powers, builds the story, and
provides clues for the player characters. Except
for those items tied to specific game worlds
(such as the Mace of Cuthbert), these histories are
purposefully vague. This should make it easier
for the DM to incorporate the item into an individual
campaign. Deities are not specifically
named, and the various wizards, warriors,
priests, and rogues are not taken from any specific
game world (again, with the exception of
those items specific to certain realms).
The histories are suggestions only, because it
is impossible to create legends and tales here
that instantly and perfectly match every campaign.
The DM can freely change any element
desired, but should remember that the history is
also meant to provide clues about the artifact to
the players, should their characters have the
sense to do any research.
This is an important section of advice and
adventure suggestions for the DM, since artifacts
are about stories. Generally, this section
discusses whether it is a good idea for the PCs to
use the item or whether it is something that they
should try to keep out of the hands of others.
There is usually a simple adventure plotline that
may include advice on how to introduce the artifact,
what to do with it, and (perhaps most
importantly) how to remove it when the adventure
is concluded.
Constant. These powers take effect without
the character having to do anything other than
hold the artifact. Sample constant powers are an
Armor Class of 5, continual true seeing (per the
spell), or an additional experience level for the
owner.
Invoked. These powers require the character
to do something, perhaps as simple as willing it,
shouting a command word, pushing a button, or
reading a page. Invoked powers often have limitations
on their number of uses.
Random. These powers are left for the DM to
define. This section lists the appropriate tables
from Appendix B: Random Power Tables and
the number of powers from that table. The DM
can then choose from those or create others.
Resonating. These powers only appear when
two or more pieces of a matched set (such as the
Eye and Hand of Vecna) are joined. Resonating
powers seldom occur and may be constant,
invoked, or random.
Curse. Every artifact has drawbacks that
reflect its nature or history. These are not all evil,
but can be things that force particular behaviors.
The two special curses mentioned earlier can be
included: artifact possession and artifact transformation.
Should either of these apply, the item's
goals or final transformation is described here.
This provides some colorful means by which
the artifact can be permanently destroyed. The
DM can create others, but none of the options
should be easy.
10

\page

### Acorn of Wo Mai

The Acorn of Wo Mai is a large lead vessel, dull
gray in color. As its name suggests, it is fashioned
to look like an enormous acorn, almost
three feet in height. Two golden bands, inscribed
with arcane characters, encircle it from bottom
to top, where they meet under a large seal of a
dragon coiled around a sword. Although it
appears to be tremendously heavy, the artifact
can be carried by a strong individual with ease.
It sometimes makes faint thumping noises, and
is warm to the touch.
According to ancient eastern legend, the Acorn
of Wo Mai is the prison of a powerful fiend who
once ruled and terrorized a great empire at the
edges of the eastern lands. The fiend was summoned
by war-wizards but escaped their control.
Hearing of this fiend's cruelties, the great
Wo Mai challenged it to battle. They fought
long, the fiend confident, for its life force was
hidden far away, and it could not be slain. When
Wo Mai discovered this, he bound the fiend in
irons that it could not break. Next, he and his
companions shaped the Acorn, imprisoned the
fiend inside, and brought the prize back to the
imperial court. When the court fell to barbarian
invaders, the Acorn was lost.
The Acorn is best used if allowed to fall into the
hands of the player characters, since its powers
(and curse) will create many role-playing opportunities.
The PCs could find the Acorn as part of a
treasure trove, or wrest it from another whom the
fiend has gained control of. The fiend will seek to
seduce a player character to his aid, all the time
stressing the need for secrecy. Should he be successful,
the fiend will manipulate the character
and even the entire party into freeing it. Should
any player character oppose this, the fiend will
do its best to turn the others against its enemy.
To rid themselves of this artifact, the player
characters should find some way to hide the
Acorn away, preferably forever. Alternatively,
they could carry it to the lower planes and open
it, trapping the fiend in his own plane.
Invoked. The fiend within the Acorn provides
good advice (Int 20), telepathically providing
answers to questions posed by its owner. It also
grants the ability to polymorph any object (1/day).
Random. 3 from Table 26: Minor Spell-like
Powers.
Curse. The fiend trapped within the Acorn is
an evil demi-god and craves its release more
than anything else. It is aware of its surroundings,
particularly the life forces of creatures
nearby, and will use its powers (and advice) to
persuade its owner to free it from its prison.
Once freed, of course, it will reward its former
master with death.
• The seal must be broken with a +5 weapon
upon the throne of the Imperial Emperor.
• The inscribed characters on the golden bands
must be erased.
• It must be cast into a volcano of Tarterus.
11
\page
The All-Knowing Eye of Yasmin Sira is a large,
opalescent strip of fabric decorated with signs of
truth, vision, and prophecy. It is always cool and
silky to the touch. It is a veil when worn by a
woman, a keffiyah when worn by a man. It is
found only in Zakhara, the Land of Fate.
Legends of the jann and Al-Badia say that the
Eye was made by Sahin Sira, the Sheikh of the
Great Ghuls, as a gift for his stolen bride, a mortal
hakima named Yasmin. He hoped that by
having her survey all the desert and peaks he
ruled, he would win her heart.
In fact, Yasmin hated her husband and her
duties. Eager to hide herself from him, she
imbued the veil with all the power she could,
binding the spirits of dying ghuls to it to protect
her. But as is the way of ghul magic, the veil did
its job too well. In time, the Eye hid her from her
husband's sight perfectly, but it also altered her
true sight, showing her only what she wished to
see.
Characters can be allowed to use the item for
a short time, but it will unbalance a campaign.
Any adventure built around it should require
that the PCs uncover some great secret. It may
be necessary to find a caliph's kidnapped son,
thus averting a war, or to properly interpret
mysterious omens that warn of some coming
doom. The item's curse will complicate these
tasks.
The ghuls will do all they can to recover the
Eye. This will lead to constant attacks and
intrigues against the PCs.
Constant. The veil provides the wearer the
benefits of the avert evil eye, nondetection, and true
12
seeing spells at will. The last of these is subject to
the curse (explained below).
Invoked. The owner gains the use of the
shapechange (I/day) and alter self (2/day) spells.
The owner also benefits from the effects of the
invisibility spell, but only to ghuls.
Random. 4 from Table 16: Divination, 4 from
Table 15: Detection
Curse. The veil gradually responds to the
owner by providing visions that match that creature's
temperament, desires, and fears. The
process takes 1d3 months, starting with small
changes or additions and gradually building to
a world of complete unreality. Once the halfway
point of the process is reached, the owner refuses
to remove the veil, even wearing it while eating
and sleeping. The words of friends and relatives
are no longer heard unless these match the character's
dream world. When the owner dies, the
ghuls arrive to claim their treasure once more.
• The Eye must be worn by a blind god.
• It must be carried to the heart of a black cloud
of vengeance by a willing hakima.
• It must be cast into the Negative Material
plane while wrapped in a cloak of shadows.

\page
The Apparatus, or the Alchemist's Apparatus as it
is sometimes known, is best described from the
notebooks of Meister Dettrick.
The very sight of it [the Apparatus] inspired a
terror within me, for its very shape spoke of the
unholy researches that planned it. It filled Herr
Gustav's great hall, o'er-reaching even the balconies
that looked upon the floor below. The
main part consisted of a great glass sphere of
sulphurous fumes, madly churning as the lightning
teased the steel receptors set atop it. The
whole was supported in a tripod of oppressive
wood and iron, beneath which were suspended
two smaller globes, each still the height of a man.
Piping arced from these to the sulphurous orb.
Ringing these were yet smaller orbs, interwoven
by tubes through which flowed streams of noxious
yellow gas. To my trepidation, Herr Gustav
already stood among the wires and pipes of the
platform, priming the foul device for the coming
storm. Then I saw that each contained a beast—
one a quivering fawn, the other a ravening dire
wolf. "Behold the test!" he cried to me, frantic
with his madness as he gestured to the orbs.
From his robes he produced a crystal rod, no
more than two feet long, that throbbed with
crystal fire. "The rod!" he shouted above the
enraged storm. "With the rod I shall—"
No more of his madness could I bear, and so
risking the fury of the elements I fled the sage's
halls and into the night....
It is unclear whether the Apparatus is a single
device or a set of plans and concepts so infernal
in their execution that the result is the diabolic
machine known by that name. The doubt exists
because several times this artifact is said to have
been both invented and destroyed, and yet it
somehow seems to recreate itself elsewhere to
once again wreak havoc upon those who experiment
with it.
The first known construction of the Apparatus
was by one known as the Alchemist of Mordentshire,
although this person is sometimes
confused with Count Strahd Von Zarovich,
another who figures in the tale. That tale says
that the Alchemist created the Apparatus in order
to divide a soul and purge it of evil or, as others
maintain, to fuse his own incomplete soul with
another. Whatever his goal, the Alchemist's
ambitions became ensnared in those of Strahd
and disaster occurred, destroying the Apparatus
and its maker.
The monstrous Apparatus had more of a life
than its maker, it seems, for it has reappeared in
other lands, sometimes as it was and sometimes
changed and improved. Thus it is that some
sages maintain that the true artifact is not the
Apparatus itself but the supposed notebooks of
the original Alchemist, and that it is from these
plans that the physical Apparatus is built. No
one, however, can ever testify to seeing a copy of
these notes.
One important feature of the Apparatus is the
rod of Rastinon. This magical item, although not an
artifact in its own right, is vital to several of the
Apparatus's powers. It must be set in place
between the two chamber orbs and then powered
by lightning—or so that is how the story goes.
The Apparatus is a wonderful artifact to
threaten player characters with because its pow13
14
Unlike many other artifacts, the powers of the
Apparatus cannot be utilized at will. Although
magical in nature, the device operates more like
a machine. To run, it must be energized by lightning.
No other electrical source will suffice, for
the Apparatus requires not only the voltage, but
the elemental power that the lightning provides.
The metal receptor plate in the top must be
struck 12 times in the space of three hours for
the device to build up the necessary charge.
Only one charge can be held at a time and
beyond the time limit, the stored energies fade.
The charge is enough to feed a single power of
the Apparatus. Which power is used is determined
by the operator, who must constantly
supervise the machine's operation. Transpossession
can be used without additional preparation,
but the remaining powers of the Apparatus
require the use of the rod of Rastinon, set in its
place between the two globes.
Invoked. The simplest power is transpossession,
the complete exchange of minds between
two creatures. The subjects are placed in the
two globes and, amid swirls of gas and glowing
blue sparks, the transfer is made. All mental,
spellcasting, and psionic abilities are transferred
between the two bodies. The new form
has the Strength, Constitution, Dexterity, and
Charisma of the host, but the Intelligence and
Wisdom of the transferred mind. The subjects
are struck unconscious for 1d3 turns. Transpossessed
subjects detect as neutral to all spells and
psionics that would reveal alignment, ethos, or
personality.
The second power, soul-splitting, divides a single
subject into two personalities. The split separates
some property of the psyche into its
opposing elements—good vs. evil, law vs. chaos,
wisdom vs. folly, etc. The two persons are physically
similar, differing only in ways that characterize
the nature of the split and the strength of
each trait. The good personality may be fair and
strong, if the original subject was filled with
good, or sickly and pale if the subject was less
than noble. Each personality has the full knowledge
and abilities (within the limits of the separation)
of the original body.
The two forms are also utterly opposed to
each other, so that cooperation is impossible.
Depending on the nature of the separation, one
will seek to destroy the other or reverse the soulsplitting
process. An evil twin would seek its
counterpart's death while the good tries for
reunion. A wise twin might revel at the freedom
ers of transpossession and soul-splitting strike at
the very essence of the player character. The
thought of having one's mind and psyche transferred
into that of an orc or, perhaps worse yet, a
goat should be enough to rouse fear in any
player character.
Since the Apparatus is not small, portable, or
even quick to use, any adventure involving it
most have a strong villain, one who can trap the
player characters and then operate the device. A
strong villain needs strong ambitions, too. The
goals of this villain are certainly more than just
tormenting the player characters. They are only
attacked because they are useful in some made
experiments or because they threaten, knowingly
or not, greater plans.
Should the characters manage to avoid the
threats posed by the Apparatus, they can still be
faced with other problems. Friends and allies
may suddenly become enemies through transpossession.
Innocents may need to be restored or
transpossessed spies ferreted out. This may
require the characters to seize and operate the
Apparatus, all at great peril to their own selves!
Among all of the artifacts, the Apparatus is the
easiest to remove from any campaign, for it has
a history of overloading, exploding, and otherwise
destroying itself. Whenever the device's
time has passed, it is a simple matter to demolish
it in a dramatic stroke of lightning. Another
Apparatus, should it ever be needed, can always
conveniently appear elsewhere, for like true science,
once released from Pandora's box, it can
never be banished completely.
from the foolish half. A foolish twin is likely to
become wild and bestial, filled with more-thananimal
cunning. In all cases, the two separated
properties become concentrated and exaggerated
in each individual until the distilled trait
dominates their personalities. It radiates with
astonishing intensity to detection spells that
reveal that trait.
The third power is that of soul-fusing. Here,
two personalities are joined in one body. Normally
this is done to reverse the process of soulsplitting,
but it is possible to merge two unrelated
personalities into a single creature. The merged
form now has two separate minds within it.
Each retains its own personality, including all
class, mental, spellcasting, and psionic powers.
One personality, however, cannot use the powers
of the other.
The result of this fusion is seldom harmonious,
for unless the two minds are in perfect
agreement on all things, they will vie for control
of the body. Any time there would be disagreement
over a course of action, an Intelligence
check is made for each mind. Should one succeed
and the other fail, that personality seizes
physical control. The subject's mannerisms,
voice, accent, likes, and dislikes are instantly
those of the dominant personality. Should both
fail, the subject is wracked by fearsome
headaches so severe that any action is impossible.
If both succeed their checks, the subject's
body is the battleground for control. Movements
become confused and jerky, behavior erratic
from moment to moment, as each personality
tries to assert itself.
Attempts to detect the mental nature of such a
person reveal details of the current dominant
personality. If there is no dominant force, the
result is a confused blur that might be mistaken
for neutrality.
Curse. With the Apparatus there are perils both
for those subjected to its horrible transformations
and for those who would use it upon
themselves or others.
For subjects, in addition to the perils described
above, there is a chance that, unable to reconcile
oneself to the alteration, madness will occur. The
subject (or subjects in the case of a split) must
immediately roll a successful saving throw vs.
death or succumb to incurable madness. Thereafter,
the subject must roll a successful saving
throw every day for a full week. Only after this
time is the subject able to come to terms with the
situation. Note that for those subjected to soulfusing,
each personality must roll a separate saving
throw and it is perfectly possible for one
personality to be sane and the other to be utterly
mad.
The experimenter risks other fates each time
the Apparatus is used. If the Apparatus is used
within the RAVENLOFT® campaign setting
(where the device was originally found), the
operator must roll a Dark Powers check each
time the device is used—even if the operator is
the subject. Furthermore, evil "twins" created by
the Apparatus are immediately adopted by the
land.
If used outside of the RAVENLOFT setting
(where such checks do not exist), there is a 20%
chance (noncumulative) that the energies of the
Apparatus create a field that transfers the device
and surrounding locale (such as the building
housing it), along with all characters, into the
RAVENLOFT realm. (Players familiar with this
realm know this is a serious curse.)
• The machine itself is quite fragile and can be
easily destroyed. However, it will recreate
itself at some other place and time.
• The characters must travel back in time to the
workshops of the original Alchemist and
there destroy him, his works, and all his
notes.
• Mystical barriers blocking the blend of science
and magic must be erected to protect
each prime material world. This will not
destroy the device, but will prevent its appearance
in that world.
15
\page
